Add cardinality calculation script (#45)
Bit-Quill/amazon-timestream-tools: tools/python/liveanalytics_migration_scripts/cardinality/README.md

# Cardinality Calculation Script

## Overview

> [Cardinality](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v2/reference/glossary/#series-cardinality) in InfluxDB is the "number of unique measurement, tag set, and field key combinations in an InfluxDB bucket." When migrating from Timestream, carefully select your InfluxDB instance specifications based on your dataset's cardinality as this directly impacts performance and resource requirements and consider migrating to a destination other than InfluxDB if your cardinality is more than ten million.

Reviewer: nit: implied since we are in la_migration_scripts but still
```suggestion
[Cardinality](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v2/reference/glossary/#series-cardinality) in InfluxDB is the "number of unique measurement, tag set, and field key combinations in an InfluxDB bucket." When migrating from Timestream for LiveAnalytics, carefully select your InfluxDB instance specifications based on your dataset's cardinality as this directly impacts performance and resource requirements and consider migrating to a destination other than InfluxDB if your cardinality **exceeds ten million**.
```

Refer to [Timestream for InfluxDB's documentation on cardinality management](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/timestream/latest/developerguide/timestream-for-influxdb.html#timestream-for-influx-getting-started-security-best-practices) to understand how exceeding recommended limits can degrade query performance and increase memory consumption. Benchmark your anticipated query patterns against representative data samples before finalizing your instance selection to ensure your analytics remain performant post-migration, paying particular attention to memory-intensive aggregation queries that might behave differently than in Timestream.

## Calculating Cardinality

> This script calculates the cardinality of a Timestream for LiveAnalytics table when mapped to Timestream for InfluxDB using the LiveAnalytics migration script. If the cardinality is under **ten million**, you can determine which Timestream for InfluxDB instance type to migrate to, otherwise how to adjust the schema for reducing cardinality. Using the default schema mapping, cardinality is calculated by computing the total unique combinations of dimensions and measure name. The script executes the following query to do this:

Reviewer: "using the LiveAnalytics migration script"

which script is this referring to?

Reviewer: "otherwise how to adjust the schema for reducing cardinality"

I think this is pretty important to highlight, or emphasize more clearly

Author: >> "using the LiveAnalytics migration script"
>
> which script is this referring to?

I have changed this to
```
. . . using the
[Timestream for InfluxDB ingestion script](../targets/timestream_for_influxdb/ingestion/README.md).
```

>> "otherwise how to adjust the schema for reducing cardinality"
>
> I think this is pretty important to highlight, or emphasize more clearly

I have changed this to
```
. . . otherwise how to adjust the schema to reduce cardinality,
for example, by using the
[Timestream for LiveAnalytics to line protocol translation script](../targets/timestream_for_influxdb/transform/README.md)
with the `--dimensions-to-fields` argument to change particular dimensions to fields.
```

|-------|-----------|---------------|--------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------|
| host1 | us-west-2 | saio3242ovnfk | cpu_usage    | 2025-04-17 16:42:54.702394001 | 0.66                  |
| host1 | us-west-2 | 9213oijfnkalf | cpu_usage    | 2025-04-17 16:42:54.702394002 | 0.70                  |
| host1 | us-west-2 | saklj213mhl33 | cpu_usage    | 2025-04-17 16:42:54.702394003 | 0.73                  |
| host1 | us-west-2 | 12b129flnbalf | cpu_usage    | 2025-04-17 16:42:54.702394004 | 0.68                  |
| . . .                                                                                                    |
| host1 | us-west-2 | 213oiasjfaosc | cpu_usage    | 2025-04-17 20:05:32.003108710 | 0.41                  |

This table is similar to the table above, except it has $`20,000,000`$ records from the same server (`host1`). In this case, each record has a unique `request_id` value. This unique value means that the total unique combinations of `host`, `region`, `request_id`, and `measure_name` is:

```math
1 \cdot 1 \cdot 20,000,000 \cdot 1 = 20,000,000
```

> In this case, `request_id` should be changed to a field when migrating to Timestream for InfluxDB.

Reviewer: let's explicitly include the new cardinality count after the transformation (1?)

Author: I have added the new result. It would be $`1`$.

If you decide to migrate to Timestream for InfluxDB and decide to translate any dimensions to InfluxDB fields, see [InfluxData's documentation for schema design best practices](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v2/write-data/best-practices/schema-design).

**NOTE:** in InfluxDB, fields are not indexed. Consider this before choosing to translate a dimension to a field during the migration process. If a dimension is often queried on, consider changing a different dimension to a field.

## Prerequisites

The following prerequisites must be met before running the script:
1. [AWS credentials configured for use with boto3](https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/guide/configuration.html#using-a-configuration-file).
2. A Timestream for LiveAnalytics table [created](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/timestream/latest/developerguide/console_timestream.html#console_timestream.table.using-console) and loaded with data.
3. [Python 3.13 installed](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

> 4. Optionally, a [Python virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html), with all packages in `requirements.txt` installed. The following command can be used to create a virtual environment, activate it, and install all necessary packages:

Reviewer: can we move this into an `## Installation` section?

Author: I have moved step `4` into a new `## Installation` section.

# Cardinality Calculation Script

## Overview

> [Cardinality](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v2/reference/glossary/#series-cardinality) in InfluxDB is the "number of unique measurement, tag set, and field key combinations in an InfluxDB bucket." When migrating from Timestream, carefully select your InfluxDB instance specifications based on your dataset's cardinality as this directly impacts performance and resource requirements and consider migrating to a destination other than InfluxDB if your cardinality is more than ten million. Refer to Timestream for InfluxDB's documentation on cardinality management to understand how exceeding recommended limits can degrade query performance and increase memory consumption. Benchmark your anticipated query patterns against representative data samples before finalizing your instance selection to ensure your analytics remain performant post-migration, paying particular attention to memory-intensive aggregation queries that might behave differently than in Timestream.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to link [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/timestream/latest/developerguide/timestream-for-influxdb.html#timestream-for-influx-getting-started-security-best-practices) for Timestream for InfluxDB documentation on cardinality management?

Reviewer: maybe we can bold "if your cardinality is more than ten million."?

Author: I have added the link and bolded "ten million".

> This script calculates the cardinality of a Timestream for LiveAnalytics table to help decide where to migrate Timestream for LiveAnalytics data and, if cardinality is under ten million, which Timestream for InfluxDB instance type to migrate to. Cardinality is calculated by computing the total unique combinations of dimensions and measure name. The script executes the following query to do this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This script calculates the cardinality of a Timestream for LiveAnalytics table when mapped to Timestream for InfluxDB using the LiveAnalytics migration script. If the cardinality is under ten million you can determine which Timestream for InfluxDB instance type to migrate to, otherwise how to adjust the schema for reducing cardinality. Using the default schema mapping, cardinality is calculated by computing the total unique combinations of dimensions and measure name. The script executes the following query to do this:
```

Thinking something more like this to highlight how cardinality is calculated with LiveAnalytics.

Author: Added, with a comma between "ten million" and "you".

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we add blurbs with the following:
- Best practices when defining an InfluxDB schema - https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v2/write-data/best-practices/schema-design/#keep-tags-simple
- An example of how to calculate series cardinality
  - Something similar but maybe smaller to the comment on the [original PR](https://github.com/Bit-Quill/sample-code/pull/55#discussion_r2049339140)
- An example of runaway cardinality and specifically mapped to a field rather than tag
- A note that fields are not indexed and therefore will affect queries and the overall decision on if InfluxDB is a suitable migration destination with the required query workloads.

Author: I have added a section with a link to InfluxData's best practices when defining a schema in InfluxDB; two examples of cardinality, one with low cardinality and another with runaway cardinality; and have made a note that fields are not indexed.

1. [AWS credentials configured for use with boto3](https://boto3.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/guide/configuration.html#using-a-configuration-file).
2. A Timestream for LiveAnalytics table [created](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/timestream/latest/developerguide/console_timestream.html#console_timestream.table.using-console) and loaded with data.
3. [Python 3.13 installed](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
4. Optionally, a [Python virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html), with all packages in `requirements.txt` installed. The following command can be used to create a virtual environment, activate it, and install all necessary packages:
   ```shell
   python3 -m venv env && \
   source env/bin/activate && \
   python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

## Usage

### Options

`cardinality.py` provides the following options:

- `-h`, `--help`: Show this help message and exit.
- `--table-name TABLE_NAME`: The Timestream for LiveAnalytics table to determine the cardinality of.
- `--database-name DATABASE_NAME`: The Timestream for LiveAnalytics database that your table resides in.

> - `--exclude-dimensions EXCLUDE_DIMENSIONS`: Optional. A list of dimension names to exclude from the cardinality calculation seprated by commas. In a real-world scenario, changing Timestream for LiveAnalytics dimensions to InfluxDB fields when translating Timestream for LiveAnalytics records to line protocol can lower cardinality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `--exclude-dimensions EXCLUDE_DIMENSIONS`: Optional. A list of dimension names to exclude from the cardinality calculation separated by commas. In a real-world scenario, changing Timestream for LiveAnalytics dimensions to InfluxDB fields rather than InfluxDB tags when translating Timestream for LiveAnalytics records to line protocol lowers the cardinality.
```
